WI-SOS 480 WIRELESS TILT METER

MODEL LS-G6-INC15

                                                           USER GUIDE V1.8
                                                           March 2018

LS-G6 USER GUIDE V1.8  September 2016
Tiltmeter

                       1
                              WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

CONTENTS

CONTENTS                                                2

TABLES                                                  3

1. DATALOGGER EQUIPMENT                                 4

2. INTRODUCTION                                         5

3. TILTMETER OVERVIEW                                   5

4. TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS                             7

5. INSTALLATION                                         8

5.1 Zero position                                       8

5.2 Supports                                            9

5.3. Mounting the tiltmeter                             14

5.4. Tiltmeter configuration                            15

5.5. Data storage                                       23

5.6. Battery life estimate                              24

6. CALIBRATION                                          25

7. MAINTENANCE                                          26

8. TROUBLESHOOTING                                      27

9. CONTACT GEOSENSE                                     28

APPENDIX A. Vibration resistance test                   29

                                                        2
                                WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

TABLES

Table 1: Product technical specifications                                                    7

Table 2: Indicative storage capacity of the tiltmeter datalogger.                            24

Table 3: Indicative lifespan for LS-G6 INC15-3. Estimates using 2 C-size batteries.          25

Table 4: Life time estimations based on the lifetime mathematical model from Saft for three

different temperature profiles                                                               25

Table 5: Results from vibration resistance test.                                             30

                                                                                             3
                   WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

1. DATALOGGER EQUIPMENT

Geosense wireless Tilt Meters/nodes are shipped with the following accessories:

                -  Data-Logger/Wireless tiltmeter (includes grounding connector)
                -  Antenna
                -  Antenna adapter
Not included:

- Horizontal/vertical support
- USB-OTG configuration cable
- Batteries
- Sensor surge protector
- Grounding rod

                                                                                  4
                                          WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

2. INTRODUCTION

     This document describes WI-SOS 480 Tiltmeter model LS-G6-INC15 and details its installation and the
     basic procedure for data acquisition.

3. TILTMETER OVERVIEW

     The WI-SOS 480 Tiltmeter is a low-power long-range wireless datalogger and inclinometer in a single
     compact box. It measures tilt in two (biaxial) perpendicular axes in the plane of the base with a highly
     precise MEMS sensor.
     The tiltmeter can also be used as a standalone logger for manual monitoring and can be configured easily
     and connected with a USB cable and an Android phone.
     It is designed for monitoring tilt in structures such as buildings, towers, monuments, bridges, tunnels,
     piles, walls, and dams. It can also be used to measure rock mass rotation or slopes.

     The tiltmeter is composed of:
     1. The casing
     2. RP N Female connector, which complies with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations,
     for the sensor network radio antenna
     3. Pressure stabilizer for protection against condensation (protective vent)
     4. Grounding
     5. Connector male RP N to RP - SMA male and aerial with RP - SMA male.

                                                        Figure 1: LS-G6-INC15 elements

                                                                                                                                     5
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

                                     Figure 2: LS-G6-INC15 Antenna with N-connector

The wireless tiltmeter can also be provided with a more robust antenna, to be placed horizontally, instead
of the standard L-antenna that is installed vertically. Please contact us with questions or for additional
details.

                                                                                                                               6
                               WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

4. TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS

SPECIFICATIONS

SENSOR

Type                           MEMS (Micro-Electro-Mechanical) inclinometer

Range                          ± 15

Axes                           Two (biaxial)

Accuracy (± 5)                 0.03% FS / 0.004°

Accuracy full range            0.17% FS / 0.025°

Resolution                     0.00°

Repeatability                  0.005°

Temperature dependency         0.002°/°C

Time required for a reading     10 seconds

Temperature sensor resolution  0.1 °C

Temperature sensor accuracy    ±0.5 °C

MEMORY

Reading capacity               200,000 readings

ENVIRONMENTAL / MECHANICAL

Box dimensions (W×L×H)         100×100×61 mm

Overall dimensions             150×120×61 mm (excluding antenna)

Operating temperature          -40 °C to 80 °C (-40 °F to 175 °F)

Weather protection             IP67

External antenna               100 mm length (including connector)

Box material                   Aluminum alloy

Vibration resistance           Test: Random vibration test Railroad profile according to level
                               C.3 (on ballast) of standard EN 50125-3:2003

Impact resistance1             Drop from 1 meter onto a concrete surface (20,000g)

RADIO

Range open sight               15 km

Range with obstacles           > 1 km

Maximum link budget            151 dB

Configuration                  Star (no repeaters needed)

                               Table 1: Product technical specifications

1 The tiltmeter has a good impact resistance. However it should be treated gently like any precision
instrument. In particular, care should be taken to avoid any impact, to protect the internal MEMS tilt sensor
and to avoid distorting the mechanics of the device.

                                                                                                                               7
                                          WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

5. INSTALLATION

     The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meter can be mounted horizontally or over a vertical plane, depending on
     the aim of the monitoring. Geosense provides several supports to fix the device.

    5.1 Zero position

     The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meter has to be installed horizontally. In the following figure you will see
     the sign criteria for both axes.

                                        Figure 3: LS-G6-INC15 A-Axis and B-Axis zero position

                                                                                                                                     8
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

5.2 Supports

The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meters can be attached to the measurement surface using threaded rods
and chemical anchors (bonded anchors) or using torque-controlled expansion anchors that go into the
surface. Three-point mounting is the best option because it prevents bending and torsion that can lead to
unstable readings. Single-anchor mounting is more prone to drift and disturbance. It is not recommended
for long-term applications.
Geosense supplies torque-controlled expansion anchors with its horizontal and vertical supports. For long-
term applications, chemical anchors are preferable because their performance is more stable and the
vibration resistance is higher. Torque-controlled expansion anchors can also be used, but only if the
mounting plate or bracket is drawn tight against the surface and cannot shift laterally.
Geosense recommends sourcing the chemical anchors locally because they are considered dangerous
goods for air transportation. If you want to install chemical anchors, Geosense can supply the mounting
plates with the M4 lock washers and socket screws required to attach the tiltmeter to the mounting plate.
Please contact us with questions or for additional details.
The following drawings illustrate the installation procedure for the LS-G6-INC15 wireless tiltmeter and its
supports for horizontal and vertical surfaces.
With the aim of reducing the thermal effects on the tiltmeter, we suggest installing a plastic cover or
similar, to keep the tiltmeter in the shade. Sun exposure causes a thermal gradient in the enclosure.

                                                                                                                               9
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)
HORIZONTAL MOUNTING PLATE

                                              Figure 4: Horizontal mounting plate

It is also possible to glue the WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meter to the measurement surface. In this case, we
also recommend attaching the horizontal mounting plate to the tiltmeter because the plate will offer a
greater surface area to increase its adhesion.

                                                                                                                              10
                WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

Figure 5: Horizontal mounting plate mounting procedure

                                                                                                    11
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)
VERTICAL MOUNTING PLATE (wall mounting)

                                        Figure 6: Vertical L-Shaped mounting bracket

                                Figure 7: Vertical mounting plate installation procedure

                                                                                                                              12
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)
VERTICAL MOUNTING PLATE (pole mounting)

The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meters can be also mounted on a pole using metallic supports.
The installation of the pole and its stability will be critical for the reliability of the readings. Depending on
the installation, a pole can be more sensitive to deformation caused by environmental loads (wind, rain,
snow, groundwater, frost, etc.) than other structures.

                                   Figure 8: Vertical mounting plate for pole mounting

                                                                                                                              13
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)
5.3. Mounting the tiltmeter

The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meter can be installed on any concrete or rocky wall, affixed to the structure
by a vertical or a horizontal plate support, bolted to the concrete or to a rock.
To mounting it, these steps should be followed:

     1. Drill the measurement surface
     2. Adjust bolts between the wall and the plate
     3. Open tiltmeter and place it over the plate
     4. Adjust bolts between tiltmeter and plate
     5. Close the tiltmeter (see section 1.3 of LS G6 Nodes User Guide)
     6. Place the aerial in the vertical position

                                               Figure 9 Bolts adjusted to the plate

                                           Figure 10 correct placement on the plate

                                                                                                                              14
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)
5.4. Tiltmeter configuration

The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meters is shipped closed and without batteries installed. In order to
initialize it, the user should follow these steps:

     a. Open the WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meter LS-G6-INC15 (using a 2.5 mm Allen wrench).

                                          Figure 11: Different views of the tiltmeter.

     b. The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meters is designed to work with either a type-C battery or an
          external power source (e.g., a solar panel). If battery mode is selected, be sure that C-type
          batteries are in the battery holders; 1 to 2 batteries can be connected. Polarity is indicated.

                                                Figure 12: Detail of power switch.

              The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meter does not have an RTC battery to keep time, so it is very
             important for the node to be powered with batteries and the time set during the installation.
             Otherwise the node will default to the year 1970 and data will not appear in the gateway (a

                                               warning will appear in the log's tab).

                                                                                                                              15
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

            Note that there is reverse battery protection, but it is not safe to keep batteries reversed in the
                                                     datalogger for a long time.

              WARNING: RISK OF EXPLOSION IF THE BATTERIES ARE SUBSTITUTED WITH AN INCORRECT
               MODEL. DISPOSE OF BATTERIES ACCORDING TO THE INSTRUCTIONS. THIS EQUIPMENT IS

                                   MEANT TO BE INSTALLED IN RESTRICTED ACCESS AREAS.

Complete configuration is done through the Android Configuration App (see chapter 2 of the WI-SOS 480
Nodes User Guide). When a new version of the app is available, a message appears automatically when
connecting the datalogger by USB.

The configuration of the tiltmeter and the radio is accessed by selecting the Setup wizard (in the tab menu,
"Node configuration," Figure 5). Inside the Node configuration menu, there are also other parameters
that the user can change, such as the Node ID or the date and time (especially important when accessing
the Node for the first time).

a)  b)

Figure 13: a) Main screen of the Android Configuration App and b) Node configuration screen, which
                                             has to be accessed to configure the datalogger.

                                                                                                                             16
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

Selecting the Setup wizard initiates the step-by-step configuration of the sensors and the radio:
1) Network size.
The size of the network (Figure 6) defines the slot time for each of the nodes to send data to the gateway,
in order to avoid data collision (see section 5 of LS G6 Gateway User Guide).

                                             Figure 14: Network size configuration.

                                                                                                                              17
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

2) Tiltmeter configuration.
On the sensor configuration screen, user can configure the sampling rate interval. Calibration coefficients
(obtained for each device) are given by the app.

                              Figure 15: Sensor configuration options for LS-G6-VW-5 ch.

NOTE: Each unit is individually calibrated to provide the ultimate in system accuracy and repeatability. The
calibration formula is directly applied to the collected reading, so data transmitted and logged into the
node is already corrected, and the user does not have to reapply the calibration formula.

                                                                                                                              18
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

3) Sensor data.
A reading of the sensor is displayed (Figure 10). In this stage, the user can see the readings in this
specific moment, and also the temperature.

                                          Figure 16: Data readings of active sensors.

                                                                                                                              19
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

4) Radio configuration.
The user must set the correct region and country to comply with local regulations. See chapter 56.2 on
the WI-SOS 480 Gateway User Guide. The network is identified by a Network ID and protected with a
password. All tiltmeters and the gateway of an installation need to have identical settings (region and
password). The default credentials of the radio network are specified in the Gateway Information Sheet
(Figure 11).
For the majority of installations, the advanced options should not be changed. For more details on the
advanced options, check chapter 2 of the WI-SOS 480 Gateway User Guide.

                                             Figure 17: Radio configuration screen.

Note that in order to simplify the datalogger configuration tasks, especially in large installations, the
network ID and password of the last datalogger configured are saved in the Android app. To edit them,
the option has to be activated by the user; otherwise the credentials introduced in the configuration of the
datalogger will be the ones that were introduced the last time the Android app was used.

                                                                                                                              20
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

5) Radio signal coverage test
Once the gateway is configured, a signal coverage test can be performed (Figure 12).
This test will check for correct connectivity between the datalogger and the gateway. Some test packages
will be sent by the datalogger, and then the Android app will check reception on the gateway (using the
Internet connection). The test will check for:

                 Correct gateway operation and communication
                 Correct radio configuration on both gateway and datalogger (including matching region

                     and ID / password configurations)
                 Quality of the signal received by the gateway from the datalogger

For the results of this test to be displayed immediately on the Android device, the gateway needs to be
installed with a working Internet connection, and the Android device also needs to be connected to the
Internet. This is what we call an "online test."

In order to perform an online test, the Glog app needs to be supplied with the gateway's serial number
and remote access password.

The remote access password is used to protect access to the gateway from the local network or the
Internet. It is separate from the radio network password, even though it is set to the same value by
default.

The gateway ID and default password are specified in the Gateway Information Sheet. Before starting the
test itself, the gateway connectivity is checked. In the case of any problem with the credentials, an error
message will appear.

The results displayed are listed for each Spreading Factor (SF). The SF represents a way of modulating
data. The gateway is capable of receiving all frequencies with several SFs at the same time. The lower the
SF number is, the shorter the message, so more messages can be sent on the network. The SF is
proportional to the distance between datalogger and gateway: higher spreading factors are capable of
transmitting data at higher distances, while lower spreading factors reach lower distances.

During the radio signal coverage test, the datalogger sends 5 or 10 packages of data at SF7 to SF12. The
number of data packages that reach the gateway can be viewed in the results in order to ensure correct
communication.

                                                                                                                              21
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

When performing a Radio signal coverage test, the position of the Android device is kept (if the user gave
permission to the app to access to the GPS data), and a security token number identifies each test.

If the gateway and/or the Android device do not have Internet connectivity during the test, the online test
will fail (since it will have been impossible to contact the gateway over the Internet), and the user will
need to perform an "Offline test." In this mode, however, the results of the test cannot be displayed in
the Android device. The security token number identifies each test. The user must write down the token
number, along with a description of where and under what conditions the test was taken. The user will
then have to check the results of the coverage test on the gateway's web interface (under network 
Signal coverage test map  Download all tests of this network).
A coverage test is considered correct if any of the Spreading Factors are able to deliver at least half the
packets sent.

Note that running the Radio signal coverage test takes approximately 2 minutes.

a)  b)

     Figure 18: Radio signal coverage performed at the end of the datalogger setup (using the Setup
                                                                          wizard).

Once the coverage test has finished, a message with the text "You have completed the configuration of
the node. Please make sure to check the coverage test results and data readings before permanently
installing the nodes onsite" will appear on the screen. This means the user has followed all the steps
needed to configure the node, but it may be necessary to check the signal coverage first to ensure that
the node can communicate with the gateway.

                                                                                                                              22
           WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

5.5. Data storage

The internal node memory size is 4 MB. The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meter stores up to 200,000 readings.
Data storage times are indicated in Table 3. Memory mode is a circular buffer. When the memory is full,
logging continues by overwriting the earliest readings. Besides the data from the sensor, the logger also
collects health data hourly, which indicates the battery voltage, the internal temperature of the node and
the node uptime.

Number of  Sampling rate  30 minutes  10 minutes
sensors    60 minutes

1          more than 10 more than 20  3.5 years

           years          years

   Table 2: Indicative storage capacity of the tiltmeter datalogger.

                                                                      23
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

5.6. Battery life estimate

The following table gives approximate battery lifespans. The user should take into account that
consumption varies depending on sampling rate and the environmental conditions.

    Sampling rate       SF9@14dBm                   SF8@20dBm

       30 sec                 5 weeks               5 weeks

       1 min                  10 weeks              11 weeks

       5 min                  48 weeks              1.1 years

       30 min                 3.3 years             3.6 years

               1h             4.6 years             4.7 years

               6h             6.7 years             6.4 years

       12 h                   >7 years              >7 years

Table 3: Indicative lifespan for LS-G6 INC15-3. Estimates using 2 C-size batteries.

Table 3 shows the lifetime estimate for three different temperature profiles to present how the
environmental conditions are also relevant to the battery life.

                              Lifetime estimates in years

Sampling rate      Singapore             Barcelona                                   Moscow

5 min              1.1                   1.2                                         1.2

1h                 4.7                   5.8                                         6.0

6h                 6.4                   8.3                                         8.9

Table 4: Life time estimations based on the lifetime mathematical model from Saft for three different

                   temperature profiles

                                                                                                       24
                                          WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

6. CALIBRATION

     All tiltmeters are assembled, calibrated, and tested under stringent quality control standards.
     Coefficients for a third-degree polynomial are determined by the least-squares method with 7 inclination
     steps (0, 2, 5, 9, -2, -5 and -9 degrees). The calibration formula is directly applied to the collected readings
     by the LS-G6-INC15 node. As a consequence, data transmitted and logged into the node is already
     corrected.
     DO NOT REAPPLY THE CALIBRATION FORMULA.
     Regarding the recalibration of the wireless tiltmeter, Geosense recommends recalibrations only for the
     following situations:

           When it is required a certificate of the tiltmeter according to the quality program of your
                company/project.
                In this case, it can also be possible to obtain the certificate locally. If you can find a laboratory
                with a proper rotary frame, you can place the wireless tiltmeter on the calibration frame and
                take measurements at different inclination steps. Then, if the probe is found to be within the
                specifications, the laboratory will be able to print out a certificate for the tiltmeter. Coefficients
                of the third-order polynomial will not be recalculated in this case. However, if the wireless
                tiltmeter is found to be out of tolerance, it will be necessary to send the device to Geosense.

           The tiltmeter requires repair. After repairing a tiltmeter, it must be recalibrated. (See
                "Troubleshooting" section)

           After completing a monitoring project. Civil works and mines are hard environments. During the
                project, the tiltmeter can be affected by: impacts, different levels of vibration, physical stresses,
                etc. Depending on the state of the tiltmeter after project completion, it may be recommendable
                to return the tiltmeter to Geosense for inspection of the mechanical parts, reassembly and
                recalibration.

           In the case of recalibration, Geosense will disassemble the wireless tiltmeter to inspect the
                mechanical parts before recalibrating.

                                                                                                                                   25
                                          WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

7. MAINTENANCE

     The WI-SOS 480 Wireless Tilt Meter is packaged in a rugged aluminum box and should provide many years
     of trouble-free operation.
     The tiltmeters require no maintenance other than normal cleaning, battery replacement, and inspection
     of the seals. Apart from this maintenance, the tiltmeters are not field-serviceable.
     The tiltmeter is a precision instrument. Apparently minor external actions or changes in the initial
     conditions of the structure can cause changes in the tilt readings, such as: rust in the supports, any
     construction pathology, the structure's thermal behavior, etc. Visual inspections can help to understand
     the cause of some registered movements.
     The tiltmeter should be treated gently like any precision instrument. In particular, care should be taken
     to avoid any impact, to protect the internal MEMS tilt sensor and to avoid distorting the mechanics of the
     device.

                                                                                                                                   26
                                          WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

8. TROUBLESHOOTING

     Readings that appear unreliable
     Unstable and anomalous readings, such as the following, are signs of a possible fault in the tiltmeter:

           Excessive thermal effects. Temperature dependency of LS-G6-INC15 is 0.002°/°C
           Anomalous behavior that cannot be easily explained according to the expected movements, such

                as values going up and suddenly going down and then going back up again or vice versa.
           Anomalous behavior of one of the two measurement axes.

     The reliability of the wireless tiltmeter reading can be affected by:
           Impacts. Dents on the tiltmeter enclosure are signs of impacts.
           High vibration levels.
           Water ingress. The LS-G6-INC15 wireless tiltmeter ingress protection is IP67 (1 meter of water
                column for 30 minutes). The tiltmeters should never be submerged in water. WATER DAMAGE
                TO INTERNAL COMPONENTS VOIDS THE WARRANTY!

     The LS wireless tiltmeter can be damaged by the above causes.
     In case of doubt regarding the reliability of the readings, the best way to detect and identify the defect is
     to compare the collected readings. Geosense recommends the following steps:

           First, inspect the structure where the tiltmeter is attached and the mounting hardware
                (mounting plates, anchors, etc.). Any compromise to or mechanical deformation of the mounting
                hardware can cause unstable readings in the tiltmeter.

           After ruling out issues related to the structure or the mounting hardware, it is recommended to
                install an additional tiltmeter close to the possibly affected one.

           Check and compare the tilt readings of the original and the verifying tiltmeter.
           If the results of the new tiltmeter are as expected, while the results of the originally installed one

                continue to be erratic, it will be concluded that the original has been damaged in the field.

     Upon detecting an affected tiltmeter, the user must contact support@geosense.co.uk to open a ticket
     and request a Return Material Authorization (RMA).
     After receiving the returned tiltmeter, Geosense will inspect the mechanical parts, reassemble and
     recalibrate the node. If this occurs after expiration of the warranty, Geosense will repair the equipment
     at its factory for parts and labor charges. Geosense will provide a quote for repairs ­ if feasible ­ for
     products returned after warranty expiration.
     Geosense is not liable for damages or erroneous decisions caused by defective units, since it is only
     responsible for the warranty of the equipment.

                                                                                                                                   27
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

9. CONTACT GEOSENSE

Phone: +44 1359 270457
Technical support support@geosense.co.uk
General information:sales@geosense.co.uk
www.geosense.co.uk
Geosense Ltd
Nova House,
Rougham Industrial Estate,
Rougham,
Bury St Edmunds,
Suffolk,
IP30 9ND
England,

                                                                                                                              28
                                          WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

APPENDIX A. Vibration resistance test

                     Table 5: Results from vibration resistance test.

CONTROL STRATEGY
Weighted control between two points placed on the tooling, for all testing directions.
See pictures in section 5.2

FINAL MEASUREMENTS
Final measurements according to specifications

CLIMATIC CONDITIONS

Temperature (ºC):    23.4

                                                                                        29
                                      WI-SOS 480 (LS-G6 INC15)

Relative Humidity (HR): 36
Atmospheric Pressure (hPa): 993

                                                                                                                              30
